---
title: 'Draft Handbook '
author: Natalie Shannon
published: true
toc: true
---

***Technician workshops ***

There are a number of workshops in the School, run by trained
technicians and well-equipped to undertake a wide variety of work, e.g.
turning, milling, grinding and welding etc.

A request for workshop assistance can be made by contacting:

<Mark.Harris@manchester.ac.uk>

The work will be discussed, a job sheet completed and the work started
in due course.

***Safety in Laboratories and Workshops ***

The School Safety Adviser is Christopher Turnbull contact via:

Email: christopher.turnbull@manchester.ac.uk

Telephone: 0161 306 3596

**Must read documentation:**

-   Management System and Safety Personnel documents which can be found
    on the School intranet
    [here](http://intranet.materials.manchester.ac.uk/safety/) (need
    correct link)

-   University safety policy which can be found
    [here](http://documents.manchester.ac.uk/DocuInfo.aspx?DocID=654)

**Mandatory training:**

You must attend Health and Safety Induction and any specialised local
safety training specified by your supervisor or the health and safety
staff.

**Risk Assessment:**

There is detailed information in the Management System document on the
how to carry out Risk and COSHH assessments for laboratory based work.

-   You need to update/revise your Risk and COSHH assessment forms
    annually when your work changes.
    <http://intranet.materials.manchester.ac.uk/safety>
    [here](http://intranet.materials.manchester.ac.uk/safety/) (need
    correct link)

You must familiarise yourself with your laboratories and pay attention
to all the safety documents relating to those areas. Safety equipment
such as safety glasses, laboratory coats, gloves and hard hats will be
issued as required and must be worn.

For Postgraduate Students there are also Compulsory Health & Safety
assessments on eProg.

The School safety policy and templates for risk assessments are
available on the Virtual Common Room.

If you have any questions regarding health and safety, please contact
your supervisor or the School Safety Advisor, Christopher Turnbull -
<christopher.turnbull@manchester.ac.uk>

***Conduct whilst using labs and equipment:***

Dave Strong - Research Technician has provided below, clear and concise
instructions regarding expected standards of behaviour regarding labs
and equipment usage.

If you have any problems with a machine please report your concerns
and/or you require assistance or guidance on any related matter please
contact Dave Strong via:

**Office location:** B016 Morton Lab

**Email:** David.Strong@manchester.ac.uk

**Telephone:** 0161 306 3597

  -
  **Machine Operation:**
  
  Switch off machines after use.
  
  Polishing machines and furnaces should be switched off, the large cutting wheel left open to dry.
  
  Polishing machines ***should not*** be left running if you leave the room.

  Grinding and grinding papers :

  When grinding, try to re-use any grinding papers that are available.
  
  Remember that you can clean them easily to remove any contamination.
  
  If you are putting used grinding paper back in the tray – clean it first as failure to do so can contaminate other materials

  **Polishing - do’s and don’ts**

  When polishing, if your sample is covered in a large foam of diamond spray or swimming in OPS then you are using too much.
  
  The diamond cloths are impregnated with the appropriate diamond paste when they are changed, the spray is simply used to ‘top-up’ the paste held within the cloth. It is the substance that is held within the fibres of the cloth that does the polishing, any that is floating around on the surface is not contributing to your polishing.
  
  This is again a matter of patience; it won’t polish any quicker if it’s swimming in polishing medium. The same goes for lubricant, it’s just to stop the sample sticking, so you don’t need loads.
  
  Liquid consumables – replacing/topping up/disposing

  If you finish anything – methanol, acetone, OPS, etc. – replace it, or if it is low then top it up.
  
  There should never be less than half a bottle of any liquid consumables at any time. Leaving 1cm of liquid in a bottle is not an excuse to think it isn’t empty, especially when the second bottle has been opened. (Remember that OPS should be diluted with 3 to 4 parts water for every part solution.)
  
  New bottles of chemicals, tape, tissue paper etc can be obtained from stores (collect tissue paper in packs of 6 only to save trips) People working out of hours should replace anything at the earliest possible opportunity when stores are open.
  
  If you finish a bottle or box, dispose of it either in the bin or in the skip at the end of the building. Don’t leave it on/under the desk, or in the bottle carriers.

 **Basic housekeeping and good practice :**

  **Clean up after yourself**. Everyone has to use the lab, not just you. So when you’ve finished, clean any surfaces, sinks or machines that you’ve used that aren’t clean.
  
  A dirty lab affects everybody’s work. There are now sample storage cupboards available – no samples should be left out on any work surface.
  
  **Return communal equipment**. Using a piece of equipment does not make it yours. Everything in the group is for everybody’s use, even if you ordered it, so share it about.
  
  Take something, use it, return it and don’t lock it in your desk. Everybody needs access to the same equipment, so communicate with each other.
  
  **Do not remove beakers, bottles from the lab.** I made sure there was a bottle of methanol, acetone, water, detergent and two of OPS, all labelled. These seem to have been used, removed and rotated so much that we have 5 or 6 random empty bottles most of the time.

  Booking Equipment / lab space

  If you have booked equipment or lab space, please arrive on time for your booked session.
  
  If you are unable to attend or no longer require your booked session, please cancel, where possible providing 24hrs notice.
  

***Stores ***

Stores are open from Monday to Friday, and are sited as follows:

**The Mill: E14**, opening hours 08:45-10:15 and 13:30-15:00

**Sackville St. Building**, opening hours 08:00-15:45

If they do not stock a specific consumable item, then the storekeeper
may be able to issue a departmental requisition (which must be
authorised) in order to obtain the goods from alternative sources.

***Laboratory, Testing and Analysis Facilities ***

A full list of laboratories and testing and analysis facilities is
available on the School of Materials
[website](http://www.materials.manchester.ac.uk/our-research/facilities/)

***Out of Hours Working ***
 
 
Out of hours working is defined as any time after 5.00 pm or before 8:00
am Monday to Friday, all day Saturday, all day Sunday, public holidays
and during the University’s Christmas closure period.

### PERMITS ARE REQUIRED FOR ALL OUT-OF-HOURS WORKING

Students, researchers and visitors wishing to work in the building after
hours must obtain permission form academic supervisor. Out-of-hours
request form can be obtained by emailing:

<som.access@manchester.ac.uk>

A request form must be signed by your supervisor and a risk assessment
detailing out-of-hours safety measures must be completed.

Entry into the buildings, outside of normal hours, is with a University
staff / student swipe card.

The card will need to be programmed first to operate the out-of-hours
door lock.

To get your card programmed contact the Technical Services Manager, Gary
Ingham <gary.ingham@manchester.ac.uk>

Card activation will only be carried out with a valid out-of-hours
request form and risk assessment.

Students carrying out approved experimental work out-of-hours must
operate a buddy system.

This must be specified on the risk assessment.

A student is allowed to carry out reading, writing, or computer work
within their workroom or in a computer suite with the approval of their
supervisor, with a remote buddy system and a risk assessment in place.

***Petty Cash***

For information about ordering procedures, making expense claims, please
contact:

<fsenonresearch@manchester.ac.uk>

**Petty Cash** - can be claimed up to the value of £50 per day from the
Income Office which is located in the John Owens Building, room G003.

[The Petty Cash Claim
Form](http://documents.manchester.ac.uk/DocuInfo.aspx?DocID=9649) should
be completed and signed off by Nicky Snook or Christine Taylor who are
located in (room D41, Sackville Street Building). The claimant then
needs to go to the Income Office to get their money.

***Travel and accommodation ***

All travel relating to University business (e.g. to a conference
directly related to your research) must be booked through Key Travel
wherever possible.

**Conference registration**, travel and accommodation arrangements should be
made well in advance and only following consultation with your
Supervisor.

An iproc requisition should be completed and submitted where applicable.

Please do not make independent travel and accommodation arrangements
with the expectation that they will later be reimbursed from University
funds.

> **Payments to Conferences/Suppliers not set up on Oracle:**

Where on-line conference fees or, occasionally, travel need to be paid
on the School credit card, please complete the [One Off Payment
form](http://documents.manchester.ac.uk/DocuInfo.aspx?DocID=7645) and
return to <Raj.Tandon@manchester.ac.uk>

Travel or conference arrangements etc must have written approval from
either the budget holder or an authorised alternative before bookings
can be made. This may be in the form of a completed paper requisition or
an email.

***Fees and Expenses:***

Items should only be claimed on Fees & Expenses forms for out of pocket
travelling expenses when it is not possible to purchase an item by
raising an order *via* a requisition.

Please ensure the correct expense claim form is completed in full with
all relevant information and ORIGINAL receipts are securely attached
using staples rather than paperclips.

The forms must be countersigned by your line manager or academic
supervisor (for students).

Forms can be downloaded at
<http://www.staffnet.manchester.ac.uk/employment/expenses/> anyone who
is on the University payroll (all staff and any students who do regular
lab Demonstrating) must use the online form, download the form, attach
receipts and obtain appropriate signatures.

Please hand all completed forms to the Head of School Administration,
Room D41, D floor, Sackville St. Building.

Please ensure receipts are securely attached as expenses without
original receipts may not be paid or may be taxed. It is advisable to
keep a copy of the form and receipts for your own records.

Where claims are made against receipts in a foreign currency overall
totals must also be given in pounds sterling. The exchange rate at the
time of reimbursement will be used for payment unless supporting
documentation is attached (eg credit card statement with numbers blanked
out showing amount paid in sterling, or evidence of currency exchange on
the date of expenditure).

**Please note that claims relating to a specific event will not be
reimbursed until after the event. **

***Research and task codes for purchasing ***

If you are making a purchase against the LightForm budget, you will need
prior permission to do so from your Supervisor.

It is important that we use the correct task codes when purchasing.

A task code will relate to the type of product or service you need to
purchase, for example travel, consumables, accommodation etc.

These are the LightForm task codes, if you are unsure as to which task
code to use, please contact Natalie Shannon
<Natalie.a.shannon@manchester.ac.uk>

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **A0501**   **IAB Meetings**
              
              To include all related expenses for hosting meetings in relation to venue hire/meals/lunches
              
              Steering board expenses – flights accommodation for academic steering committee members
  ----------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **A0502**   **Investigator Travel to include:**
              
              All related LightForm travel/accommodation/subsidence related to conferences and industry visits

  **A0503**   **A0503 (PDRA) To include: **
              
              Travel/accommodation/subsidence
              
              Conferences
              
              Industry visit related expenses

  **A0701**   **IAB Consumables to include:**
              
              - PDRA - Travel/accommodation/subsidence
              
              - Management team - Travel/accommodation/subsidence

  **A0702**   **Outreach Consumables**
              
              To include all related expenses for visiting academics – bench fees where applicable, subsistence contributions
              
              All web/social media/photography

  **A0703**   **Team Building Consumables**
              
              To include Management meeting lunch/dinner and other related expenses, including PhD events

  **A0704**   **General Consumables & Licences**

              Stores and equipment purchases
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

***Travelling on University business:***

If you are travelling on University business, you are responsible for
familiarising yourself with any potential travel risks and ensuring you
have travel insurance, please see below:

**Risk Assessment **

The University have recently introduced a policy for all colleagues
travelling on University business to familiarise themselves with
potential travel risks and to register with the School of Materials H&S.

Full details regarding a risk assessment/pre-travel self checklist and
general travel advice can be found
[here](https://www.staffnet.manchester.ac.uk/insurance/travel/)

To register University business travel, please contact
<christopher.turnbull@manchester.ac.uk>

**Travel Insurance **

Full details of University travel insurance can be found
[here](https://www.staffnet.manchester.ac.uk/insurance/travel/)

Please note you will only be covered by University travel insurance for
the duration of University business. If you are arriving earlier/staying
later for leisure purposes, you will need to provide your own personal
travel insurance.

***LightForm Listserves ***

Several LightForm Listserves have been set-up, please consider who you
wish to contact/include in correspondence prior to using, please
consider if Listserve is appropriate for your correspondence.

  **LightForm Listserves **                               
  -------------------------------------------------- --- --- --- ---
                                                                  
  **All current PDRA's and PhD's **                   
  <lightform-pdras-phds@listserv.manchester.ac.uk>
                                                                  
                                                                  
  **All PDRA Team, PhD's, Management Team, MSc**
  <MASS-PHD-PDRA@LISTSERV.MANCHESTER.AC.UK>
                                                                  
                                                                  
  **All PDRA Team**                                           
  <lightform-pdra@listserv.manchester.ac.uk>          
                                                                  
                                                                  
  **All PhD's **                                                  
  <lightform-phds@listserv.manchester.ac.uk>          
                                                                  
                                                                  
  **All PDRA's and PhD's**                                    
  <lightform-pdras-phds@listserv.manchester.ac.uk>
                                                                 

Individual email addresses – do you want these listed?

[[]{#OLE_LINK2 .anchor}]{#OLE_LINK1 .anchor}***Theme Meetings ***

LightForm research projects are categorised into themes:

1.  Aluminium

2.  Data & Modelling

3.  Titanium & Magnesium

Progress for each individual theme is reviewed in a weekly meeting,
usually occurring on a Tuesday.

With a multisite team it is imperative that progress is shared, updated
and recorded with engagement from all parties, in order to avoid working
in isolation, therefore attendance at theme meetings is strongly
recommended.

Everyone is invited to the meeting, which will be co-delivered by a
PDRA/Supervisor/PhD

**Input at theme meetings**

Everyone is invited to give a brief update on their work, including:

-   Summary of activities/experiments

-   Reporting of any technical difficulties (what has/hasn't worked)

-   Experiment plans for the following month

-   Providing summary slide (as shown in the dropbox folder or on the
    Slack *\#titanium* channel) summarising progress, plans and updates
    to milestones/deadlines

-   Summary slides should be shared in advance of theme meetings, please
    forward to the Lead Researcher, at least one day prior to the
    scheduled meeting

**Example project progress summary slide:**

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Projects**                                                       **Lead Researcher**   **Progress**                            **Plans for Next Month**                                                          **Milestones**
  ------------------------------------------------------------------ --------------------- --------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------
  Synchrotron (SXRD) Data Analysis (Strain Partitioning / Texture)   Christopher Daniel    -Completed tests at Diamond             -Edit python script and begin analysis of a set of expts                          -Python scripts and automate texture by Dec.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                     (PDRA)                -Method for analysing texture in MAUD   -Use TOPAS and MAUD to calculate volume fraction and texture for a set of expts   -Paper by April 2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                           -Method for TOPAS batch analysis                                                                                          

  Plane Strain Compression Rig (PSC) for Diamond I12 Beamline        Christopher Daniel    - Basic ceramic rig design              -Contact manufacturers about design and materials                                 - Initial design, materials and manufacture plan by end of Nov.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                     (PDRA)                                                        -Arrange visit to Diamond                                                         - Ready to test by end of Dec.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

For colleagues unable to attend in person, a conference call will be
setup within the theme Slack channel to join 5 minutes before
the meeting.

**Schedule of meetings:**

You will receive an email meeting reminder; the full schedule of dates
can be found on the shared LightForm Google Calendar, if you require
access to this calendar, please contact Christopher Daniels
<christopher.daniel@manchester.ac.uk>

***Slack ***

The LightForm communications hub is Slack, a single place for messaging,
tools and files – helping everyone save time and collaborate together.

 Within SLACK we have a channel for every conversation, themes,
conferences, website etc.

As a SLACK members you can join and leave channels as and when they need
to – unlike with lengthy email chains, threads keep side conversations
from derailing the topic or project at hand.

SLACK enables [Face-to-face and
face-to-screen](https://slack.com/intl/en-gb/video-conferencing), you
can talk in depth over voice or video calls directly from Slack, if you
need to show your work, you can also share your screen.

If you have not yet signed up to SLACK, please contact Natalie Shannon
<Natalie.A.Shannon@manchester.ac.uk> for an invitation to join.
